# Dusk OS is simple

Many software projects claim to be simple. I believe that Dusk's claim to
simplicity is stronger than most non-Forth software projects.

Dusk's simplicity comes from it being a Forth. Forth's approach to simplicity is
revolutionary, but it's difficult to comprehend without a good hands on
experience with it. To describe this simplicity to the uninitiated, I'd say that
Forth's approach to complexity is to sidestep it.

Let's try to illustrate this simplicity with examples. Because Dusk's main
innovation compared to other Forths is to include a C compiler, my main
reference when comparing complexity is Fabrice Bellard's Tiny C Compiler.

Tcc enjoys a very good reputation among geeks, and Fabrice Bellard is generally
considered to be a genius. Nevertheless, Dusk's C compiler is less than 40
kilobytes of code and tcc is 1400 kilobytes of code. So, a ratio of 35 to 1.

How can we explain this difference? It's true that Forth code is generally
denser than C, but not by a factor of 35. It's true that I'm sometimes clever,
but not more than Fabrice. There are multiple reasons for these differences and
they all have to do with Forth's habit of side-stepping complexity.

First of all, there's relocation and binary format. tcc produces ELF binaries
where Dusk CC compiles code in memory designed to run where its written. Tcc
dedicates 10,000 lines of code to only file format logic. That's huge, but if
you want to build a compiler in the UNIX world, you *have* to do this.

Forth is a memory oriented system. It comes with constraints, but it also comes
with simplicity benefits. As UNIX users, we're blind to these benefits and
see some of the complexity associated with computing as unavoidable. It's not.
That is why Forth's approach to simplicity is revolutionary, because it removes
a blindfold.

Another simplicity factor is parsing boilerplate. Tcc's assembler's input is
text formatted in GNU assembler format. This parsing boilerplate is a
significant part of tcc assembler-related complexity. This contraint in UNIX is
inevitable because inter-process communication in UNIX generally has to be done
through streams, usually in text format for maximum compatibility. This implies
serialization and deserialization boilerplate at multiple levels. In Forth,
memory is shared and no such constraint exists. Words communicate through
structured memory. We can thus afford to sidestep this complexity and use
regular Forth words to assemble binaries.

We have a good example of the kind of constraints UNIX imposes on programs by
looking at i386-gen.c. In there, we see that the assembler included in tcc isn't
used. Instead opcodes are directly generated in binary format. This makes sense
because proceeding this way is simpler than generating textual assembler syntax
in a buffer and then processing it through the assembler.

It is unfortunate, however, to have to do this because it makes the code more
cryptic than in has to be. DuskCC can freely use the words from its HAL, which
encapsulates encoding logic, and doesn't have to go through a clunky text
interface.

Inline assembly is another interesting one. Yes, it's nice to have the option to
add inline assembly to a C unit. To this end, tcc includes an assembler that
weights 1200 lines with 2100 lines for the i386 backend. DuskCC has the "##"
directive allowing to execute arbitrary Forth code, which can of course include
calls to the assembler words, but also more sophisticated constructs. The
implementation of that directive is 6 lines of code.

In conclusion, I think we can say that DuskCC is simpler than TinyCC because it
has less features. But as it turns out, those features, as they are designed,
are not needed in Dusk because it has better and more powerful alternatives at a
lesser complexity cost. They're just designed differently. That is what I call
"side-stepping".
